.PU
.TH WCD 1 local
.SH NAME
wcd - Wherever Change Directory
.br
chdir for DOS and Unix
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wcd
[-a[a]] [-A <path>] [-b] [-c] [-d <drive>] [-e[e]] [-E <path>]
.br
[-f <treefile>] [-g[a|d]] [-G <path>] [-h] [-i] [-j] [-k] [-l <alias>]
.br
[-[m|M] <dir>] [-n <path>] [-N] [-o[d]] [-q] [-[r|rmtree] <dir>] [-s]
.br
[-S <path>] [-t] [-u <user>] [-v] [-V] [-w] [-x <path>] [-xf <file>]
.br
[-z #] [-[#]] [+[#]] [=] [drive:][dir]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Wcd.
Directory changer for DOS and Unix.
Another Norton Change Directory (NCD) clone with more features.

Wcd is a program to change directory fast. It saves time typing at the
keyboard. One needs to type only a part of a directory name and wcd will jump
to it. Wcd has a fast selection method in case of multiple matches and
allows aliasing and banning of directories. Wcd also includes a full-screen
interactive directory browser with speed search.

By default (if no wildcards are used) wcd searches for a directory with a name
that begins with the typed name.

For instance:

   wcd Desk

will change to directory /home/waterlan/Desktop
.br
When there are multiple matches, wcd will present the user a list
of all matches. The user can then make a selection with a few keystrokes
(most of the times only one).

Wcd fully supports wildcards, i.e. *, ? and [SET].

\(ga*\(aq matches any sequence of characters (zero or more)
.br
\(ga?\(aq matches any character
.br
[SET] matches any character in the specified set,
.br
[!SET] or [^SET] matches any character not in the specified set.

A set is composed of characters or ranges; a range looks like \(ga\(gacharacter
hyphen character\(aq\(aq (as in 0-9 or A-Z).  [0-9a-zA-Z_] is the minimal set of
characters allowed in the [..] pattern construct.  Other characters are
allowed (i.e. 8 bit characters) if your system will support them.
To suppress the special syntactic significance of any of \(ga\(ga[]*?!^-\\\(aq\(aq, in-
side or outside a [..] construct and match the character exactly, precede
it with a \(ga\(ga\\\(aq\(aq (backslash).


Using wildcards makes powerful searching possible. For instance:

   wcd *top
.br
match any directory name that ends with "top".


   wcd *top*
.br
match any directory that has "top" in the name.

   wcd [a-c]*
.br
match any directory name that begins with "a", "b" or "c".

It is also possible to give a part of a directory path.
E.g.:

   wcd me/Desk

wcd searches for directory that begins with "Desk" and which path matches
*me/Desk*

It is allowed to type any kind of expression with slashes
and wildcards. E.g.:

   wcd src*/*1?/a*2

If no wildcards are used and wcd finds a perfect match, wcd will ignore
all wild matches by default. This behaviour can be changed with the -w option.

The interactive directory browser can be started by using option -g.

   wcd -g

See option -g for more information.

Wcd generates a treedata file were it searches the directory.
On Unix systems wcd does add
.I links
to the treedata files while scanning the disk, but does not follow them.  While
following links wcd could end up scanning infinite loops, or scan very large
portions of a network.

Wcd can also change to directories that are not in the treedata file. E.g.:

   wcd ..

If wcd found a match but cannot change to the directory it tries to remove it
from the default treedata file.
.I Not from the extra treedata file.
See also option -k.

Wcd keeps a directory stack which is stored on disk. The stack has a default
size of 10 and is cyclic. See options -z, -, + and =.

In multi-user environments a very handy option -u can be used to
change to directories of other users. See option -u.

On DOS and Windows systems it does not matter if you use a slash (/) or
a backslash (\\) as directory-separator.

It is possible on DOS and Windows systems to change drive and directory
in one go by preceding the directory name with the drive name.

   wcd d:games

The Windows versions (console, PowerShell, MSYS, zsh, cygwin) support Windows SMB LAN
UNC paths without drive letter such as \\\\servername\\sharename. Wcd for
windows console makes use of the \(aqpushd\(aq command to automatically map a UNC
path to a drive letter. In windows PowerShell, MSYS, zsh and Cygwin UNC paths are
fully supported. The current working directory can be a UNC path.

Wcd supports 8 bit character sets on all systems, and has optional
support for Unicode. See also section LOCALIZATION/UTF-8 and UNICODE.

Remark about 8 bit characters on Windows: Only the original equipment
manufacturer (OEM) code page installed with Windows appears correctly in a
command prompt window that uses Raster fonts. Other code pages appear correctly
in full-screen mode or command prompt windows that use TrueType fonts.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-A <path>
Scan directory tree from <path> and \fIappend\fP to the default treedata file.

    Examples:
    wcd -A .
    wcd -A d: -A e: -A \\\\server\\share
    wcd -A /home -A /etc

On Windows one can scan all shared directories
of a Windows LAN server by typing something like:
wcd -A \\\\servername.

See also option -S and -s and -E.

.TP
.B \-a
Add current path to default treedata file.

Use this option to quickly add the current path
to the default treedata file. Re-scanning the complete disk can
take a long time in some cases.
.TP
.B \-aa
Add current and all parent paths to default treedata.
.TP
.B \-b
Ban current path.

Wcd places the current path in the ban file. This means that wcd
ignores all
matches of this directory and its sub directories.

The ban file can be edited with a text editor. Use of wildcards
are supported and it is matched against absolute path.

Banned paths are not excluded from scanning the disk.
To do that use option -xf.
.TP
.B \-c
direct CD mode

By default
.I wcd
works as follows:
.br
 1. Try to find a match in the treedata file(s)
.br
 2. If no match, try to open the directory you typed.

 In direct CD mode
.I wcd
works in reversed order.
.br
 1. Try to open the directory you typed.
.br
 2. If not, try to find a match in the treedata file(s).
.TP
.B \-d <drive>
Set drive for stack and go file (DOS only).

The stack file and the go-script
are by default stored on drive c: if environment variable
HOME is not set. Use this option if drive
C: is a read-only drive.
This option must be used in front of the stack options -, + and =.
.TP
.B \-E <path>
Scan directory tree from <path> and append to Extra treedata file.

See also options -A and -S.
.TP
.B \-e
Add current path to extra treedata file.

Use this option to quickly add the current path
to the extra treedata file.
.TP
.B \-ee
Add current and all parent paths to extra treedata file.
.TP
.B \-f <filename>
Read treedata file <filename>. Don\(aqt read the default treedata file.
.TP
.B \+f <filename>
Read treedata file <filename> in addition to the default treedata file.
.TP
.B \-G <path>
Set directory path of go-script.

.TP
.B \-GN
Don\(aqt create go-script.

This option can be used in combination with the option
.I -j
if one doesn\(aqt want wcd to create a go-script.

.TP
.B \-g
Graphical interface (only in version with curses interface).

Wcd starts a textual curses based \(gagraphical\(aq interface.
The user can select a directory via a full-screen
interactive directory browser. It has a Vi(m) like
navigation and search method.

If no search string is given wcd presents the whole
tree which is in the default treedata file and the extra
treedata files.

If a search string is given the match list is presented
as a graphical tree.

.TP
.B \-ga
Graphical interface with alternative way of navigating. With
this option one can\(aqt jump to unrelated directories.

.TP
.B \-gd
Dump the treedata files as a tree to stdout.

.TP
.B \-i
Ignore case.
Dos and Windows versions of
.I wcd
ignore case by default. Unix versions regard case by default.

.TP
.B \+i
Regard case.
See also option -i.

.TP
.B \-j
just go mode

In this mode wcd will not present a list when there is
more than one directory that matches the given directory.
Wcd will just change to the first option. When wcd is
invoked again with the same arguments it will change
to the next option, and so on.

Wcd will print the directory to go to to stdout.
So a different installation method can be used.
One could make the following function for bash or ksh:

function wcd()
.br
{
.br
  cd "\(ga$HOME/bin/wcd.exe -j $*\(ga"
.br
}

On windows systems, if one is running 4NT shell, one could
make the following alias:

alias wcd \(gacd %@execstr[wcdwin32.exe -z 0 -j %1]\(ga

This method eliminates the need of the go-script, so one can
use option
.I -GN
in combination with -j.

.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help and exit.


.TP
.B \-K
Colors.

Use colors in graphical mode.

.TP
.B \-k
Keep paths.

Keep paths in treedata when wcd cannot change to them.
The default behaviour of wcd is that it tries to remove
paths from the treedata when wcd cannot change to them.
With this option this behaviour is turned off.
.TP
.B \-l <alias>
aLias current path.

Wcd places the current path with alias <alias> in the alias file.
Aliases are case sensitive.
.TP
.B \-M <dir>
Make directory and add to extra treedata file.

.TP
.B \-m <dir>
Make directory and add to treedata file.

.TP
.B \-N
Use numbers instead of letters.

Wcd with a conio or curses based interface (see section INTERFACE)
presents a match list default numbered with letters.  When the -N
option is used the match list is numbered with numbers.
Regardless of the -N option one can type a
letter or numbers to make a selection from the list of matches.

.TP
.B \-n <path>
Read relative treedata file (Unix: <path>/.rtdata.wcd,  DOS: <path>\\rtdata.wcd),
do not read the default treedata file. If <path> is a file, wcd will add
<path> instead of <path>/.rtdata.wcd or <path>\\rtdata.wcd.
See also option +S.

Example:
.br
suppose another system has been NFS mounted
to mount point /mnt/network


      wcd -n /mnt/network src

Wcd now opens file /mnt/network/.rtdata.wcd
The file contains the paths relative from that point.

The relative treedata file should already have been created
using the wcd +S option.

.TP
.B \+n <path>
Read relative treedata file in addition to the default treedata file. See option -n.

.TP
.B \-o
Use stdin/stdout interface.

When for some kind of reason the conio or curses interface
of wcd doesn\(aqt work one can fall back to the stdin/stdout interface
of wcd by using the -o option.

.TP
.B \-od
Dump all matches to stdout.

.TP
.B \-q
Quieter operation.

Printing of the final match is suppressed.
.TP
.B \-r <dir>
Remove directory and remove from treedata file.

If the directory is empty,
.I wcd
will remove it, and try to remove it from the treedata file.

.TP
.B \-rmtree <dir>
Recursively remove directory and remove from treedata file.

Wcd will remove the directory and all it\(aqs sub directories
and files, and remove the directories from the treedata file.

.TP
.B \-S <path>
Scan directory tree from <path> and \fIoverwrite\fP the default treedata file.

    Examples:
    wcd -S c:/
    wcd -S /

See also options -A, -s and -E. Together with option -A you can create a default treedata file of your choice.

    wcd -S c: -A d: -A \\\\server\\share
    wcd -S /home -A /etc -A /usr

With the Windows versions one can scan all shared directories
of a Windows LAN server by typing something like:
wcd -S \\\\servername.

.TP
.B \+S <path>
Scan disk from a certain path. Make
.I relative
treedata file.

Scan disk from path <path> and place relative paths
in a relative treedata file.
This file is used by the -n and +n options of wcd. E.g.
wcd -n <path> src
.TP
.B \-s
(re)Scan disk from your $HOME directory.

This is the default scanning mode.
.I Wcd
for DOS or Windows scans
the current disk from root \\ or from %HOME% if HOME is set.
The existing default treedata file is overwritten.

.TP
.B \-t
Do not strip tmp mount dir /tmp_mnt (Unix only)

Wcd strips by default /tmp_mnt/ from the match. Directory /tmp_mnt
is used by the automounter. This behaviour can be turned off with the
-t option.

.TP
.B \-u <username>
Read default treedata file of user <username>, do not read
your own default treedata file.

Wcd now scans the treedata file of another
.I user
.
On Unix the base directory for user home directores is assumed
to be
.I /home
, so wcd tries to scan /home/<username>/.treedata.wcd.
On DOS/Windows the base directory for user home directores is assumed
to be
.I \\\\\\\\users
, so wcd tries to scan \\\\users\\<username>\\treedata.wcd.

One can define a different base directory with environment variable WCDUSERSHOME.
See section ENVIRONMENT.

.TP
.B \+u <username>
Read default treedata file of user <username> in addition to your own treedata file.

.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Print version information and exit.


.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
verbose operation.

With this option
.I wcd
prints all filters, bans and excludes.
.TP
.B \-w
Wild matching only.

Treat all matches as wild matches.
.TP
.B \-x <path>
Exclude <path> from scanning.

When this option is used wcd will exclude <path> and all its
subdirectories when wcd is scanning a disk. Wildcards are
supported and matched against absolute paths. Option
-x can be used multiple times.

  wcd -x <path1> -x <path2> -s

Option -x must be used in front of any scan option (-s, -S, +S, -A, -E).

On DOS/Windows systems one must specify the drive letter
depending on if enviroment variable HOME or WCDHOME is set.
If HOME or WCDHOME is set one needs to specify the drive letter. Example:

  wcd -x c:/temp -S c:

Otherwise don\(aqt specify drive letter.

  wcd -x /temp -s

.TP
.B \-xf <file>
Exclude all paths listed in <file> from scanning.

When this option is used wcd will exclude all paths listed in
<file> and all their
subdirectories when wcd is scanning a disk. Wildcards are supported
and they are matched against absolute paths; one path per line.
Be aware that wcd will not ignore leading or trailing blanks on a line,
because they are legal characters in a directory name.
Option -xf can be used multiple times. When one wants to exclude all
banned paths from scanning one can do the following (example
for wcd on unix):

  wcd -xf ~/.ban.wcd -s

Wildcards are supported. For instance to exclude all your CVS directories
with cvs administrative files add a line with:
.br
*/CVS
.br

Option -xf must be used in front of any scan option (-s, -S, +S, -A, -E).
.TP
.B \-z #
Set maximum stack size.

The default size of the stack is 10. Stack operation can
be turned off by setting the size to 0.
This option must be used in front of any other stack option (-,+,=).
Otherwise the size of the stack will be set back to the
default 10. A correct command is:

  wcd -z 50 -

The new stack size will be 50, wcd will go one directory back.
A wrong command is:

  wcd - -z 50

Wcd goes one directory back, the stack gets the default size
10. \(aq-z 50\(aq is ignored.

Add this option as the first option to your wcd alias or function.
E.g. for the bash this would be:

function wcd
.br
{
.br
   wcd.exe -z 50 $*
.br
   . $HOME/bin/wcd.go
.br
}

.TP
.B \-[#]
Push dir [ # times ].

Go back a directory. \(aqwcd -\(aq goes one directory back. To go
more directories back add a number to it. E.g. wcd -3
The stack is cyclic.
.TP
.B \+[#]
Pop dir [ # times ].

Go forward a directory. \(aqwcd +\(aq goes one directory forward. To go
more directories forward add a number to it. E.g. wcd +2
The stack is cyclic.
.TP
.B \=
Show stack.

Use this option if don\(aqt know anymore how many times to push or pop.
The stack is printed and you can choose a number. The current place
in the stack is marked with an asterisk \(ga*\(aq.

.SH "INTERFACE"

Wcd has three different interfaces to choose from a list of matches.
The interface can be chosen at compile time.

The first interface uses plain
.I stdin/stdout.
A numbered list is printed in the terminal. The user has to
choose from the list by typing a number followed by <Enter>.
This interface does not
provide scroll back functionality in case of a long list.
The scroll back capability of the terminal/console has to be used.
It is very small and portable.

The second interface is built with the
.I conio
library. It provides a builtin scroll back capability.
The user is presented a list numbered with letters.
Choosing from a list can be done by pressing just one letter.
This interface is fast because it saves keystrokes.
If possible the screen will be restored after exiting.
One who prefers to type numbers can use the -N option.
This interface is meant for DOS systems.

The third interface is built with the
.I curses
library. It is similar to the conio interface.
The curses version of wcd has also an additional
.I graphical
interface.
It lets the user select a directory via a full-screen
interactive directory browser. It has a Vi(m) like
navigation and search method. It can be activated with
option -g.
This interface is portable to DOS, Windows and Unix.

By using the -o option one can always fall back to
the stdin/stdout interface.


.SH "INSTALLATION"

The current working directory of a
.B Bourne-like or C shell
can only be changed by the builtin cd command. Therefore the program is always
called by a function or alias. The function or alias sources a shell script
(go-script) which is generated by the wcd program. Wcd can only work after
the function or alias is defined.

.TP 4
.B Bourne-like shells:

Korn Shell (ksh, pdksh), Bourne Again Shell (bash), Z shell (zsh), ash, ...

Add the following function to a startup file of your shell. For instance in:
$HOME/.kshrc (ksh), $HOME/.bashrc (bash), $HOME/.zshenv (zsh)

function wcd
.br
{
.br
   <PREFIX>/bin/wcd.exe $*
.br
   . $HOME/bin/wcd.go
.br
}

Replace <PREFIX> with the prefix used during package installation.
Start a new shell. For DOS bash and Windows MSYS/ZSH the location
of wcd.go is different. See section FILES (go-script).

.TP 4
.B C Shell (csh):


Add the following alias to your $HOME/.cshrc file.

alias wcd "<PREFIX>/bin/wcd.exe \\!* ; source $HOME/bin/wcd.go"

Replace <PREFIX> with the prefix used during package installation.
Start a new C Shell

.SS "INSTALLATION WIN32 CONSOLE VERSION"

In a Windows NT/XP/Vista console (Command prompt) a win32-program cannot
change the current work directory (although a DOS-program can).
That is why wcd generates a batch script (wcdgo.bat)
which must be executed in the current shell.

.TP 4
.I Windows VISTA

In a Windows VISTA command prompt you may have limited access to directories.
To get access to more directories you need administrator rights. You can get a
command prompt with administrator rights if you right click on the command
prompt icon and select \(gaRun as administrator\(aq.

.SS "INSTALLATION WINDOWS POWERSHELL VERSION"

Add the following function to your PowerShell user profile.
The location of this profile is stored in the $profile variable.
It is required that environment variable HOME or WCDHOME is
defined.

function wcd
.br
{
.br
   <PREFIX>\\bin\\wcdwin32psh.exe $args
.br
   & $env:HOME\\wcdgo.ps1
.br
}

Replace <PREFIX> with the prefix used during package installation.
Start a new PowerShell

Wcd for PowerShell supports only the file system provider. No other providers.

.SS "INSTALLATION OS/2 CONSOLE VERSION"

In a OS/2 console an os2-program cannot
change the current work directory.
That is why wcd generates a command script (wcdgo.cmd)
which must be executed in the current shell.


There is more information about wcd installation in the wcd package.

.SH "ENVIRONMENT"


.TP 4
.I HOME and WCDHOME
Wcd uses environment variable HOME to determine where to store its files. See
also section FILES.  Environment variable WCDHOME overrides HOME. If both HOME
and WCDHOME are set, WCDHOME will be used instead of HOME.

For the Unix, Cygwin, Windows PowerShell and Windows MSYS/ZSH version it is required
that HOME or WCDHOME is set. For the other versions of wcd the use of these
variables is optional.

.TP 4
.I TERMINFO
If  the  environment variable TERMINFO is defined, wcd
with ncurses interface checks for a local terminal definition
before checking in the standard place. This is useful if
terminal definitions are not on a standard place. Often
used standard places are \%/usr/lib/terminfo and \%/usr/share/terminfo.

.TP 4
.I PDC_RESTORE_SCREEN
Wcd with PDCurses interface recognizes the environment variable
PDC_RESTORE_SCREEN.  If this environment variable is set, PDCurses will take a
copy of the contents of the screen at the time that wcd is started; when
wcd exits, the screen will be restored. One can set this variable
e.g. in AUTOEXEC.BAT. Example:
.br

   set PDC_RESTORE_SCREEN=1

For Cygwin this would be \(gaexport PDC_RESTORE_SCREEN=1\(aq.

Windows allows only a small buffer to be saved. So it is not always possible to
restore everything. Some garbage data may be printed in the console after
wcd exists if you have set a large buffer width.

.TP 4
.I SHELL
Printing of #!$SHELL on the first line of the go-script for Bourne-like or C shell
is needed for 8 bit characters. Some shells otherwise think that the go-script is a binary file
and will not source it. In Cygwin bash one may need to define $SHELL with an \(gaexport\(aq command,
otherwise wcd can\(aqt read the variable.

.TP 4
.I BASH
Wcd for DOS bash uses $BASH instead of $SHELL, because $SHELL point to the DOS command shell.
One may need to define $BASH with an \(gaexport\(aq command, otherwise wcd can\(aqt read the variable.

.TP 4
.I WCDFILTER
Specify filters with environment variable WCDFILTER.  All directories that
don\(aqt match the filter(s) are ignored.  A list can be specified by separating
filters with colons (:) on Unix/Cygwin and semicolons (;) on DOS/Windows systems
(Similar as specifying the PATH variable). Filters are case sensitive on Unix
and case insensitive on DOS/Windows.

Example Unix:
export WCDFILTER=projects:doc

Example DOS/Windows:
set WCDFILTER=projects;doc


.TP 4
.I WCDBAN
The paths specified with environment WCDBAN will be banned by wcd. See also option
-b. Specify a list of paths separated by colons on Unix/Cygwin and semicolons on DOS/Windows.

.TP 4
.I WCDEXCLUDE
The paths specified with environment WCDEXCLUDE will be excluded by wcd. See also options
-x and -xf. Specify a list of paths separated by colons on Unix/Cygwin and semicolons on DOS/Windows.

Example Unix:
export WCDEXCLUDE=/dev:/tmp:*CVS

Example DOS/Windows:
set WCDEXCLUDE=*/windows;*/temp;*CVS

.TP 4
.I WCDUSERSHOME
With this variable one can set the base directory where the users home directories are.
If this variable is not set wcd will assume /home on Unix, and \\\\users on DOS/Windows.
This variable is used to scan treedata files of other users. See also options -u an +u.

.PP
In verbose mode wcd will print all filters, bans and excludes. See option -V.


.SH "LOCALIZATION"


.TP 4
.I LANG
The primary language is selected with the environment variable LANG. The LANG
variable consists out of several parts.  The first part is in small letters the
language code. The second is optional and is the country code in capital
letters, preceded with an underscore. There is also an optional third part:
character encoding, preceded with a dot.

Examples (Bourne type shell):

export LANG=nl               Dutch
.br
export LANG=nl_NL            Dutch, The Netherlands
.br
export LANG=nl_BE            Dutch, Belgium
.br
export LANG=es_ES            Spanish, Spain
.br
export LANG=es_MX            Spanish, Mexico
.br
export LANG=en_US.iso88591   English, USA, Latin-1 encoding

For a complete list of language and country codes see the gettext manual:
.br
.nf
http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.html#Language-Codes

.fi
On Unix systems you can use to command \(galocale\(aq to get locale specific
information.

.TP 4
.I LANGUAGE
With the LANGUAGE environment variable you can specify a priority list of
languages, separated by colons. Wcd gives preference to LANGUAGE over LANG.
For instance, first Dutch and then German: \%LANGUAGE=nl:de. You have to first
enable localization, by setting LANG (or LC_ALL) to a value other than
\(gaC\(aq, before you can use a language priority list through the LANGUAGE
variable. See also the gettext manual:
.br
.nf
http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.html#The-LANGUAGE-variable
.fi

If you select a language which is not available you will get the standard
English messages.

.TP 4
.I WCDLOCALEDIR
With the environment variable WCDLOCALEDIR the LOCALEDIR used during
compilation and installation of wcd can be overruled. LOCALEDIR is used
by wcd with native language support to find the language files. The GNU
default value is \%/usr/local/share/locale. By typing \(gawcd -V\(aq wcd will
print the LOCALEDIR that is used.

If you have installed wcd in a different directory than the default
directory you may need to set the environment variable WCDLOCALEDIR
to point to the locale directory.

Example (windows cmd):

set WCDLOCALEDIR=c:/my_prefix/share/locale

.TP 4
.I LC_COLLATE
When there are multiple directory matches wcd presents a sorted list.
The sorting depends on the locale settings. If the environment LANG
has been set the matches are sorted like dictionaries or phone
books are sorted in that language. For instance dots and dashes
are ignored, or letters e with and without accent are equal, or
upper and lower case is ignored.

The sorting gives preference to environment variable LC_COLLATE over
LANG. If you make LC_COLLATE equal to "C" or "POSIX", locale sorting is
turned off. For instance if you want Dutch language, but not Dutch
sorting, you can do something like this:

export LANG=nl_NL
.br
export LC_COLLATE=C

.TP 4
.I LC_CTYPE
With regard to character encoding Wcd will give preference to variable
LC_CTYPE over LANG. For instance to set character encoding to UTF-8 the
following environment setting can be done.

export LC_CTYPE=en_US.UTF-8

.TP 4
.I LC_ALL
All locale environment variables that start with \(gaLC_\(aq are overruled by
environment variable LC_ALL if it is defined. Wcd gives preference to LC_ALL
over LC_COLLATE and LC_CTYPE.

.TP 4
.I WINDOWS CODE PAGES 
There are two groups of code pages. DOS code pages (OEM) and Windows code pages
(ANSI). The default encoding for Windows, when configured with Western regional
settings, is  ANSI CP1252. Windows programs, for instance notepad, use this
default system ANSI code page. The Windows console uses by default an OEM code
page (CP850) for compatibility with DOS programs. If you use a DOS version of
wcd in a Windows console it will work, because of the DOS code page. But the
DOS version of wcd lacks support for long directory names and network drives on
Windows. The windows version of wcd is a native windows program and will use
the Windows system ANSI code page. So on a Western regional Windows it will use
CP1252 for directory names and messages. Therefore the code page of the console
has to be made equal to the system code page (changed to 1252) to make wcd for
Windows work properly with special characters such as accented characters
or the euro symbol. The console raster font only supports the default OEM code
page, so you also have to change the font to true type Lucida console to
support the ANSI code page. The Windows system code page can be changed via the
Control Panel regional options. The Windows console code page is changed with
the \(gachcp\(aq command.

When you type \(gawcd -V\(aq, the actual used character encoding is shown.

.TP 4
.I UTF-8 and UNICODE
Wcd can support UTF-8 Unicode. To see if wcd was built with Unicode support
type \(gawcd -V\(aq.  If your locale character encoding setting is UTF-8 you
should see the euro symbol and Chinese characters (meaning: "Chinese").  Other
multi-byte character encodings should also work, but that has not been tested.

In order to view UTF-8 characters your console/terminal also needs to support
UTF-8. The xterm version that comes with XFree86 4.0 or higher includes UTF-8
support. To activate it, start xterm in a UTF-8 locale and use a font with
iso10646-1 encoding, for instance with

.nf
 LC_CTYPE=en_GB.UTF-8 xterm -u8 \\
  -fn \(aq-Misc-Fixed-Medium-R-SemiCondensed--13-120-75-75-C-60-ISO10646-1\(aq
.fi

A Windows console in unicode mode can be started with the command \(gacmd /u\(aq.
UTF-8 code page is activated with command \(gachcp 65001\(aq. You need to set the
font to True Type Lucida Console (not raster fonts). A problem for wcd is that
batch scripts don\(aqt run anymore when code page 65001 has been activated. This
is a blocker for Wcd.

In Windows PowerShell you also need to activate code page 65001 and select a
True Type font.

Wcd UTF-8 support in Windows Powershell is experimental and may not work
properly. Note that also the Windows system code page needs to be set
to UTF-8. The default Unicode encoding in Windows is UTF-16
instead of UTF-8.

Wcd has been \(gasoft\(aq converted to Unicode. In its core it still handles
strings as 8 bit streams. Only the lines printed to screen are on the fly
converted to Unicode characters. Wcd fully relies on libc functions and has
no UTF-8 specific code. See also
.nf
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/unicode.html
.fi

.SH FILES

.TP 4
.I wcd.exe
The program. Do not rename it to \(gawcd\(aq on Unix systems. In a Bourne-like or C
shell the program is always called by a function or alias, because the
current working directory of a Bourne-like or C shell can only be changed by
the builtin cd command. See also section INSTALLATION.

.TP 4
.I default treedata file
DOS: \\treedata.wcd or %HOME%\\treedata.wcd
.br
UNIX: $HOME/.treedata.wcd
.br

This is the default treedata file where wcd searches for matches.
If it is not readable wcd will create a new one.

.TP 4
.I extra treedata file
DOS: \\extra.wcd or %HOME%\\extra.wcd
.br
UNIX: $HOME/.extra.wcd
.br

An optional extra treedata file. If it exists and is readable wcd
will try to find matches in this file also.

.TP 4
.I ban file
DOS: \\ban.wcd or %HOME%\\ban.wcd
.br
UNIX: $HOME/.ban.wcd
.br

In this optional file wcd places banned paths. See option -b.
Wildcards are supported.

.TP 4
.I alias file
DOS: \\alias.wcd or %HOME%\\alias.wcd
.br
UNIX: $HOME/.alias.wcd
.br

Optional file with wcd aliases. See option -l.

.TP 4
.I stack file
DOS: c:\\stack.wcd or %HOME%\\stack.wcd
.br
UNIX: $HOME/.stack.wcd
.br

In this file wcd stores it\(aqs stack. The drive-letter can be
changed with the -d option.

.TP 4
.I go-script
DOS BASH: c:/wcd.go or $HOME/wcd.go
.br
WIN32 CONSOLE: c:\\wcdgo.bat or %HOME%\\wcdgo.bat
.br
WINDOWS POWERSHELL: $env:HOME\\wcdgo.ps1
.br
WIN32 MSYS/ZSH: $HOME/wcd.go
.br
OS/2 CONSOLE: c:\\wcdgo.cmd or %HOME%\\wcdgo.cmd
.br
UNIX: $HOME/bin/wcd.go
.br

This is the shell script which wcd.exe creates each time.
It is sourced via a function or an alias. The
drive-letter can be changed with the -d option.
For history reasons it is placed by default in ~/bin
on Unix systems.
The directory of this file can be changed with the
option -G.

.TP 4
.I relative treedata file
DOS: <path>\\rtdata.wcd
.br
UNIX: <path>/.rtdata.wcd
.br

Text file with relative paths from <path>. See options +S, -n and +n.

.PP
The win32 console version of wcd behaves as the DOS version.
The Cygwin version of wcd behaves as the UNIX version.

.PP
All .wcd files are text files. They can be edited with a
text-editor.

.PP
If the environment variable
.I WCDHOME
is set wcd will use WCDHOME instead of HOME.

.SH "AUTHOR"

Erwin Waterlander,
.br
waterlan@xs4all.nl
.br
http://www.xs4all.nl/~waterlan/

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ksh "(1), " csh "(1), " bash "(1), " zsh "(1), " ncurses "(1), " locale "(1)"
